Elastic Search is open source again, at least according to a blog post released by Elastic on August 29th. In that post, it states that the AGPL is going to be added to both Elastic Search and Kibana over the coming weeks. In my opinion, this is a pretty significant development, as it potentially signals the end of companies moving away from open source. 

If you're unaware, Elastic Search and Kibana used to be open source up until 2021, when they decided to move away from their original Apache 2.0 license to a dual license setup of the SSPL and the Elastic License V2, neither of which are recognized as free software by the Open Source Initiative. So, why did Elastic move to a non-free license in the first place? Well, in a blog post released by Elastic at the time, they claimed it was due to bad business practices by AWS and their Amazon Elastic Search Service. The license change was designed to prevent companies from taking both Elastic Search and Kibana products and providing them directly as a service without collaborating with Elastic. 

Of course, Amazon and AWS were within their rights to do this, as the code was licensed under the permissive open-source Apache 2.0 license, which Elastic had consciously chosen to use. But they decided to make a drastic change and alter the licensing. If this all sounds familiar, that's because Elastic isn't the only company that has done this with its products. Other notable cases include MongoDB, HashiCorp, and, more recently, Redis Labs with Redis, along with that controversial logo change.

What makes this news so significant is that Elastic was one of the earlier companies to adopt a source-available business license and was arguably one of the trendsetters of the current movement where companies are becoming less open-source-friendly, despite their products being built on the contributions of many open-source contributors. So, with Elastic moving back to open source, it signals that this trend may be coming to an end, and we might see some of our favorite tools returning to being open source. 

In fact, Elastic is going a step further by adopting the AGPL, which is a much more copyleft license than the Apache 2.0 it was originally licensed under. All of this raises the question: why? Why is Elastic re-embracing open source? In the blog post, they state that their original change, though painful, ended up working, as it caused Amazon to fully invest in their fork and resolve any market confusion. But to me, this gives off strong "mission accomplished" vibes, especially as they preemptively addressed potential arguments from trolls.

While I'm excited about this change, the stock market doesn't seem to share the enthusiasm, as the company's stock has dropped by 25% in after-hours trading. Ouch—a bad day to be an Elastic shareholder, but a great day to be an open-source enthusiast. 

Taking a look at the stock price overall, if we zoom out, we can see that the value hasn't really grown over the last few years, aside from the initial bump from going close source in the first place. I'm sure that's why other companies thought it was a good idea as well. Either way, this is huge news, and as I said before, it may signal a shift in the close source trend we've seen in recent years. If that's the case, then I'm really excited about the future and am allowing myself a bit of hope that we might one day see Redis return to its former glory.