
I finally did it. Three months ago, I left my job as a principal software engineer at Amazon, where I worked for 18 years. This year, 2024, the job would have paid me around $650,000. For most people, that type of money means that you made it. But instead, I thought it would be the right time to quit. The tech job market is turbulent right now, and given all of my tenure, the job was the definition of security and stability. Instead, I've decided to hire a team, build out a studio, and make content full-time.

Why did I do it? Why did I leave the safety of a sure thing? This could end really badly for me. Not only could I fall on my face, but if I fail, it's going to be in public. I've gotten several million views on my videos. Don't mess this up, Steve. In this video, I'll walk you through the four things that I learned about money that gave me the courage to take this big leap, and I'll also tell you whether the theory matches the reality now that I've been on my own for three months. At least one of these things was a complete surprise to me.

If you're new to the channel, my name is Steve Win. My new goal is to help one million people grow their careers by sharing the hard-earned knowledge that I've acquired over the decades in the industry. If you want more of my content, subscribe to my free newsletter. And if you'd like to join a positive community of over 5,000 people actively supporting each other to grow their tech careers, join my free Discord. Links to both can be found in the description below.

Before I get into my first point, let's talk about Red Lobster. If you don't know, Red Lobster is a casual dining restaurant in the US. In May of 2014, the chain was purchased by Golden Gate Capital, a private equity firm, for $2.1 billion. By 2019, the number of restaurants hit an all-time high of 700 locations. But then the pandemic hit, and the restaurant never fully recovered. This year, it's seen a drop-off of 30% of customers since its peak and it's lost a staggering $76 million this last fiscal year. Part of this loss was because of an ill-conceived all-you-can-eat shrimp offering, which lost the company around $1 million. Just recently, the company declared Chapter 11 bankruptcy and plans to close 99 of their locations.

Why do I bring up Red Lobster in this video? If you look at the private equity firm that purchased the chain, Golden Gate Capital, you might think that they took a big risk by investing in restaurants and that the bet didn't pay off. When times became tough, they got desperate and tried to win it all back with a risky bet on all-you-can-eat shrimp. Don't ever bet against Americans and their all-you-can-eat appetite. But what if I told you their bet wasn't risky at all? In May of 2014, Golden Gate Capital purchased the chain for $2.1 billion. Just two months after the deal closed, they sold off the real estate that the 500 restaurants sat on for $1.5 billion. This significantly reduced the risk of the purchase. But it crippled the future of Red Lobster because now it had to pay rent on the property that it formerly owned. In the bankruptcy filing from this year, rents total $200 million per year, way more than the $76 million that it lost this year and way more than the $11 million it lost on the shrimp deal.

Now, I'm not a fan of buying companies, stripping them of their assets, and ladling them with debt. Far from it. But I bring it up because what Golden Gate Capital did was they took an asymmetric risk. They bought a company with at least $1.5 billion in assets for $2.1 billion. Later, they were able to declare bankruptcy to clear some of the debts that it saddled the company with. And that's my first point: you always want to be looking for asymmetric risks in your life, where you're on the side that doesn't stand much to lose and the upside is large and uncapped. Even though my compensation was comparatively large at Amazon, if I did a stellar job and made the company a ton of money, the most I would get is a pat on the back, maybe a 5% raise and some stocks that vest in a couple of years. My risk profile for continuing to work at Amazon was: I didn't risk much by staying there, but my upside was severely capped.

Compare that with going into business for myself, creating content and related side hustles. If I do a really good job, I get all of the upside. But you may be saying to yourself, "Steve, what about the downside of going into business for yourself?" Well, I'll tell you. During Q4 of 2023 and Q1 of 2024, I was on track to make more money than I would at Amazon just from content creation. So I knew my income wouldn't go to zero if I left my job. Staying at Amazon, I would make a steady amount of money but with a capped upside. By leaving Amazon, I have a downside that isn't guaranteed, but an upside that is not limited. So I realized that I had an asymmetric risk opportunity. The risk still exists, but it's a calculated risk. For those of you watching, always be on the lookout for big upsides with limited downside risk. When you recognize these situations, think about making a bet. In my case, the bet was on me. If I'm going to take a shot on anything, it'll be on myself. It's the one person I'll always trust. Don't bet on all-you-can-eat shrimp schemes to save the company. Bet on the billions in real estate and their bombass cheddar biscuits.

Before I get into my second point, I just got to say, I'm a Jeff Bezos fanboy. To stay at Amazon for as long as I did, you have to be brainwashed in some capacity. While I'm a fanboy, I'm not an Amazon apologist. They've done some great things like impossibly delivering batteries to you the same day that you order them. But they've also done some things that I can't defend, like the way they treat warehouse workers. But I don't believe they're evil. I think they do it to delight their customers. I truly believe it comes from a good place. But the company gets tunnel vision in their pursuit to make end users happy. That's Jeff's thing. Amazon exists solely to make its customers happy. The company started off as a bookstore and now it does web services and video streaming and everything in between. The general way it did this was by taking a lot of asymmetric risks, which we just went over. Hire a bunch of software engineers that have a bias for action and delivering things quickly, and place a lot of small bets that could pay off big. If the businesses fail, let them die. For the ones that succeed, double down. I've been on both sides of this. I worked on the first Kindle and worked on the precursor to Prime Video when both of them launched in 2007. These became big successes. But I also worked on at least three businesses that failed.

One thing that Amazon hasn't done much of is bet the company on a single risky bet. A "bet the farm" situation is an example of a one-way door. If you want to walk through that door, there's no going back and making the decision again or reversing it. In the early 2000s and 2010s, there was this company called Jawbone, and they were killing it. They basically created the categories of wireless Bluetooth headsets and wireless Bluetooth speakers. They were raking in the dough and had a valuation of $4 billion. But when the Bluetooth speaker market started to have some real competition from the likes of Bose, they decided to switch their focus to create a new category: wearables. They were there before Fitbit. They were there before Garmin, before Apple, before Nike. Their fitness tracker, the UP, launched in 2011 and sold out instantly. They had created two categories on their own, and this third one looked like it was going to catapult the company to even greater heights. But they didn't do enough testing of their devices. They were breaking left and right, so they decided to issue a recall for the first-generation device. This cost them $100 million. The company was in a cash crunch, which required taking on more debt. They still didn't do a great job with the quality of their products after this. The software was buggy and they didn't nail the hardware. Fitbit started to gain popularity and the unit economics didn't make sense. The margins weren't great per device sold. They got embroiled in a trade dispute, and that's when Apple came out with the Apple Watch. Their big bet on wearables sunk the company. They bet the farm on creating a new category instead of leaning in and selling more high-margin products in the existing categories that they themselves invented. Jawbone made a one-way door decision. Once they walked through, there was no going back.

Most decisions are two-way door decisions. If you go through the door and it doesn't work out, you can just walk back through it and figure out what to do next. And that's my second point: if you have a two-way door decision, make the decision quickly and decisively. Very few decisions in life and business are one-way doors. Getting married, having children, or getting full neck and arm sleeve tattoos are one-way doors. They're going to work out at the end of the day, no matter what, but it's going to be very painful if you made the wrong call. Quitting my job to make content full-time, taking a big swing to see if I can get a big upside and positively impact millions of people's careers, that's a two-way door decision. This isn't a one-way door. I could always go back to working a 9-to-5 job. But this is why I took my shot.

If you have any questions, please feel free to ask in the comments. Otherwise, don't forget to subscribe to my channel, hit the notification bell, and join my newsletter and Discord for more insights. See you in the next video.

---

A consequential decision is in front of you. But it's easily reversible; it's a two-way door. Just make it already! If you have a big decision, but it's difficult or painful to unwind, take your time. Slow down and look at it from all angles before proceeding. Now, being able to tell the difference between them is the part that takes experience. In my opinion, the vast majority of decisions are ones you can back out of with no harm, no foul. So don't agonize over them.

For my next point, I'd like to tell you a story that illustrates this concept. In a small fishing village in Brazil, there was a businessman on vacation. While relaxing on the beach, he noticed a local fisherman hauling in a hefty catch of fish. The businessman approached the fisherman and asked, "How long did it take you to catch all of those fish?" The fisherman said, "Oh, not too long." The businessman asked, "Well, why don't you spend more time fishing and catch even more?" The fisherman smiled and said, "This is more than enough to feed my family and friends." The businessman asked, "So, what do you do with the rest of your time?"

"I wake up early, go fishing for a bit, then come back home to spend time with my children. In the afternoon, I take a nap with my wife, and in the evening, I gather with my friends in the village to drink, play music, and dance the night away," replied the fisherman. The businessman, a well-educated man with a degree in business, saw this as an opportunity to help the fisherman. He said, "I can help you become more successful. If you spend more time fishing and save up money, you can buy a bigger boat and catch even more fish. Then you can start your own company, build a cannery, and create a distribution network. Eventually, you'll be able to move to a big city like São Paulo and manage your business empire from there."

The fisherman asked, "And what happens after that?" The businessman chuckled, "After that, you can finally retire. You can move back to a fishing village, wake up early, catch a few fish, play with your grandchildren, take naps with your wife, and spend your evenings drinking and enjoying music and dance with your friends." The fisherman said, "But isn't that already what I'm doing now?"

This story illustrates my third point: if you're money-rich and time-poor, guess what? You're still poor. Life experiences have an expiration date. Why trade a non-renewable resource, time, for things that will only decrease your quality of life? Constantly striving for more material success and wealth takes time away from something you can't buy back later. My friend Ethan Evans has a saying: your kids are the only people who will remember that you worked nights and weekends. I want to take naps with my wife. I want to see my kids grow up. I want to spend time with my parents while they're still here. I want to help as many people as I can grow their careers. I want to express myself creatively and take epic photos. I want to work on my golf game. I don't need to prioritize maximizing corporate profits. I don't want to grind myself into a fine dust so I can retire and finally have time with my kids, but by then they've moved out for college.

Money solves money problems. I've been with Amazon long enough that I can take a bet on myself for a while and still be okay. But I can't buy back time. We have a short amount of it on this planet. After you have shelter, food on the table, and you don't have to worry too much about where the money will come from to cover your basic expenses, it's time to shift away from trading your time for more stuff. 

I'd like to take a second to thank today's video sponsor, Brilliant.org. I say this a lot, but I have an unlimited budget for learning and self-improvement. Brilliant is the best way to learn math, science, and computer science interactively. Passive reading or watching videos is the worst way to learn something. It gives you a false sense that you understand things deeply. What's worse is that you waste a lot of time pseudo-learning when you could have been actually learning. Brilliant has lessons on mathematics, computer science, AI, and more, with new ones added every month. They've just added a course on LLMs that I've just completed. Now, I'm no beginner when it comes to machine learning and computer science, but I'm also not an expert on the bleeding edge of generative AI. I use Brilliant to make sure that I have a solid understanding of the underlying concepts and terminology. This enables me to conduct deeper research and continue more advanced learning. Brilliant is a wonderful resource for me to stay up to date on things now that I'm no longer working a corporate tech job. To try everything Brilliant has to offer free for a full 30 days, visit brilliant.org/lifeengineered or click on the link in the description. New content is added all the time. They just added a course on predicting with probability, creative coding, and exploring data visually. So go check it out. I'd like to thank Brilliant again for sponsoring today's video.

Now we can get to the part of all of this that's been a big surprise to me now that I've been gone from the company for three months. When you get a lot of free time, it doesn't automatically get filled up with awesome things. I found myself for the first couple of months just as busy as I was with a full-time job without the results to show for it. How did I gain 40 to 50 hours a week and still not get to do all of the things that I wanted to? It turns out that there's this thing called Parkinson's Law, which is the idea that work expands to fill the time available for its completion. So even though I had more time, the things I was doing expanded to fit the newly free time. I was scrolling more to do research on videos. I write a weekly newsletter, and I found that the time it took me to finish any one newsletter doubled. Parkinson, the guy that described the law, has the story of a woman who has all day to send a postcard. She walks to the store to buy it, goes to others because she doesn't like the selection, spends some hours picking one, and spends energy crafting the perfect message. Then she goes to the post office to mail it. If she had allotted 30 minutes to send the postcard, she could have done it in that time, but since she had all day, she took all day. So beware if you make big decisions to reallocate resources like time or money. For me, I needed to put my phone away and turn notifications off. Just like when I was doing all of my side hustles and working full-time, I still needed to maintain a structured day. You have all the time that you need at your disposal. If you're not intentional and disciplined, I could double the free time you had and you would still complain about not having a free moment. Don't fall into the same trap that I did.

For my last point, I want to circle back to my corporate idol, Jeff Bezos, and a framework he employed when he decided to start Amazon way back in the '90s. This story starts with studies and research done on people at the end of their lives. Researchers have found when they talk to people in palliative care—basically folks very close to death—what they regret most about their lives. Their answers, despite asking thousands of these folks, are amazingly similar: 

1. I wish I had the courage to live a life true to myself, not the life others expected of me.
2. I wish I hadn't worked so hard.
3. I wish I had the courage to express my feelings.
4. I wish I had stayed in touch with my friends.
5. I wish I had let myself be happier.

Jeff Bezos, before he started Amazon, applied what he called the regret minimization framework. Basically, if he didn’t go out on a limb to make a bet on this thing called the internet, he would have regretted it on his deathbed. And that’s my last point. You need to employ the regret minimization framework in your life. If you do, you’ll find that coupled with two-way door decisions and looking for asymmetric risk, a lot of decisions about your life that were previously very difficult become ridiculously easy. I want to try to do epic things with my life and stay true to myself. I want to work less hard. I want to maximize happiness for myself and my family and friends. That’s what I’m going to take a shot at doing. On my deathbed, I would have really regretted it if I didn’t go for it. Sure, my lifetime total earnings may be lower with this choice, but the point of life isn’t to die with the most amount of money accrued that I’ll never have the chance to spend.

I hope you enjoyed today’s video. But none of this matters if you don’t have any time in your life. Luckily for you, I’ve made this video on how I have time for everything. I made it when I was balancing my work life, having kids, about five side projects, and a ton of hobbies. Take a look if you want to know how I did it.