
I had a remote tech job at Amazon, but then RTO kicked in. I quit after they asked me to move to another city. So, this article is talking about how someone quit their job because they didn't like the return-to-office policy. You let me know if this is something that makes sense.

So here, we're following someone named Gazi Jaren. She joined Amazon as a software engineer in July 2022 and was working remotely. By August 2023, she was asked to return to the office. In December, the company asked her to move cities. Jaren left Amazon to work at Pinterest, saying she didn't want a company to decide where she lived.

I studied computer science in college and wanted to aim high and work at a FAANG company. In July 2022, three months after graduating, I started a full-time software engineering job at Amazon after applying and interviewing for the role. So, it's probably sometime during the pandemic. I was on the Route 53 team, which handles domain management, and I felt like I was doing meaningful work. Route 53 is a pretty awesome team to be on. I mean, that's where the URLs and how everything is connected to AWS.

I stayed at Amazon for nearly two years, but I chose to leave in May after they introduced a return-to-HUB policy. I don't know if that's any different from a return-to-office policy, but let's check it out. This policy required me to move to a different city to be in the office with more teammates. I think employees should be able to choose where they work from, and I didn't want a company to decide where I lived. That would be really nice, and I never understood why, if most software engineers could do their work from home on their computer, companies would want to force them into the office if it would make them unhappy.

I enjoyed working remotely at Amazon. When I started working at Amazon, the job was fully remote. My teammates were mostly in Vancouver, but I was in Toronto, so they were still in the same country. There's just a three-hour time difference, and I don't think three hours is really the biggest difference between communicating with your teammates. I went to the Toronto office a couple of times, but it was super empty. I visited the Vancouver office twice when the company flew me out for social events. My accommodation and flights were covered. Okay, that's living a really nice life.

My time at Amazon was great. I had great mentors and felt like I was learning something new every day. I started as an entry-level software engineer and was promoted after the first year. Now, that's a really impressive thing to do. Most people get promoted after two and a half years, but she was able to do this in one year. So, she's probably really smart. One downside was that every eight weeks or so, I had to be on call for a week, and if a service went down and customers couldn’t access it, I'd have to fix or mitigate the issue in no time. So, on-call is something that nobody really likes. It's when you're available 24/7, and nobody wants to be available 24/7. I had to wake up at 3:00 a.m. a couple of times, but I understood this was part of the job.

I was initially concerned about Amazon's reputation for employees overworking, but on my team, there was respect for work-life balance. This is something I want to tell a lot of people: no matter how much or how bad the company culture is that you hear about, it's really team-dependent. So if you actually find a really good team, that could be really good for you, but it just gets a little harder to find that right manager and the right team culture in a really stressful company.

Toronto and Vancouver are in different time zones, but I never worried that someone was going to ask me to do something after I finished for the day. If I logged on early, my teammates would tell me not to. Those are some really good teammates. Amazon asked employees to return to the office and, in some cases, relocate to a new city. I liked remote work and not having to waste time commuting. Yeah, that's the commute time is something that holds a lot of people back. If anything, I find that people log in a little bit earlier when they work from home because you don't have to drive.

When I started doing internships at college, COVID-19 had already hit. I didn’t know what it was like to work in an office before joining Amazon, and I'll tell you right now that you're not missing anything at the office at Amazon. Around August 2023, my manager told her team that the company was implementing a return-to-office policy. It wasn't strict at first, and I didn't go into the office regularly for the first two months. 

Yeah, okay, so there's a pretty lenient policy about whether to go to the office, but it's a little weird when no one's in your Toronto office and your whole team is in Vancouver. So, it's like, why does this apply to this person? Then we were notified that the company would start monitoring how many times we came in and that we had to go in three times a week. That's a lot. Why three? I remember some leniency about not coming in if you were sick or on vacation that week. Isn't that just like a normal sick day or a normal PTO? That’s not leniency. But my manager told me that consistently refusing to cooperate with the policy could lead to termination.

This one I'm not so sure about. I would tell you that most managers would probably be a little bit more passive about it, like, "Hey, you should probably come into the office a little bit more," or if things are struggling, they'll probably have a few chats with you first before they really just pull that termination trigger.

So, I went to the Toronto office, but all my meetings were still virtual because my team was in Vancouver. So, she was forced to go to the office three times a week and was still having virtual meetings, so it wasn't really fulfilling the collaborative aspect of returning to the office. Around December 2023, my manager informed us that the company was now implementing a return-to-HUB policy where employees would need to be in the same location as other members of their team. He mentioned that it would help embody the collaborative values that Amazon has. If you look harder at the Amazon principles, you're not going to find collaboration in there. So, I don't know what this article is talking about.

There were rumors floating around that this might happen because they'd already done it in the United States. For me, the primary option was moving to Vancouver, but members of our backend team were also in Seattle, so that was another hub for our team. If I'd moved to Seattle, I'd get a pay bump because I'd be paid in the United States. The company would also sort out my visa, and there would be a way to get a green card. I decided that Seattle would be a better option than Vancouver. I told them I'd move, and they expected me to relocate before the end of 2024. 

Um, so that’s a pretty good deal. You'd get a little bit of a pay bump and you get to work in the States. I decided to stay in Toronto, and I left my job. Okay, so it looks like she didn't want to work at Amazon in Seattle. I knew that Seattle would provide me with opportunities, but my whole life was in Toronto. I wanted to keep my options in Toronto open. So, in early 2024, I started applying for other jobs there. I didn’t want to have to downgrade my career to stay, so it took me a while to find a job that offered a comparable salary and perks. Yeah, I think something a lot of people don’t realize is that you could be a senior engineer, but if you apply to another company, they might downlevel you with the same expectations and pay you a lot less. So, it was a really smart move on her part to actually try to find another company that would offer her a job at the same level that she was already at.

In May, I was offered a software engineer two role at Pinterest, which is the same level I already was at Amazon. I accepted, leaving Amazon that same month. The salary was higher than my Amazon salary, and I wouldn’t have to go through a major shift by leaving Toronto. Now, I'm going to point out something about this salary being a little bit higher: every time you jump companies, your salary will go up at least 10%. I'm happy with my choice. Interviewing with other companies made me realize that U.S. companies are really open to Canadian candidates. I could choose to go to the U.S. again if I wanted. I'd rather go to the U.S. on my own time than be forced to go there in a rush. I'd also want the autonomy to choose where I'd move. I didn’t want Amazon to tell me the city or how often to be in the office.

So, I have a bit of a controversial opinion on this. She didn’t have to be this extreme. You can actually find another team that works in the city you want to be at. There’s probably another team that does have a return-to-office policy, and at the same time, you get to choose which company you want to work at if you're applying externally. You can find another job that works in the city that you want to be at.

I don’t think the work I did at Amazon required me to come into the office or move. I was mainly coding features on my computer. Even if I had to move to Seattle, many of my team members would still have been in Vancouver. Yeah, so that would have been a little bit of a challenge, but at the same time, I think she also had the
