Setting up Prometheus for your backend involves several key steps to collect and monitor custom metrics. Here's a summary of the process:
Install Prometheus: Download and install Prometheus on your backend system, or use Docker to run it as a container.
Configure Prometheus:
prometheus.yml Configuration File: This file contains the configuration for scraping metrics.
Job Definition: Define jobs (targets) that Prometheus will scrape for metrics. Each job defines how Prometheus will access a service.
Example of a job configuration:
yaml
Copy code
scrape_configs:
  - job_name: 'your_backend_service'
    static_configs:
      - targets: ['localhost:8080']
job_name: A unique identifier for the job.
targets: The services or endpoints Prometheus will scrape for metrics.
Expose Metrics Endpoint:
Your backend should expose a /metrics endpoint that Prometheus can scrape. It serves metrics in a format Prometheus understands.
Define Custom Metrics:
Custom metrics can be created in your application, such as counters, gauges, histograms, and summaries.
Example types of metrics:
Counter: A cumulative metric that increases over time, typically used for counting events (e.g., number of requests).
Gauge: A metric that can increase or decrease, typically used for values like memory usage, CPU load.
Histogram: A metric that samples observations, typically used for request durations.
Summary: Similar to a histogram but with more focus on quantiles, useful for things like response time percentiles.
Alerting:
Alerts can be configured to notify you when certain conditions are met (e.g., high latency, service downtime).
Example conditions for alerting might include:
High CPU usage: Alert if the CPU usage exceeds a threshold.
Request failure rate: Alert if the number of failed requests exceeds a threshold.
Prometheus Alertmanager handles the alert notifications.
Scraping Metrics:
Prometheus scrapes the defined targets based on the configuration (e.g., every 15 seconds). Metrics are stored in Prometheus’ time-series database.
Visualizing Metrics:
After collecting the metrics, you can use tools like Grafana to create dashboards for monitoring and visualization.
By following these steps, you can set up Prometheus in your backend system to monitor application performance, define custom metrics, and set up alerting for critical conditions.




To set up alerts in Prometheus, follow these steps without needing specific code:
Define Alerting Rules:
Prometheus uses alerting rules to determine when an alert should be triggered. These rules are specified in a configuration file (typically alert.rules or directly within the Prometheus config file).
Alerts are based on Prometheus queries (PromQL) that evaluate conditions on the collected metrics.
For example, an alert rule might monitor CPU usage, error rates, or service availability.
Configure Alertmanager:
Prometheus uses Alertmanager to manage alerts. It receives alerts from Prometheus, groups them, and sends notifications to various channels (email, Slack, etc.).
Install and configure Alertmanager. The configuration file (alertmanager.yml) defines how and where to send notifications (e.g., email, Slack, PagerDuty).
Set Alert Notification Channels:
In the Alertmanager configuration file (alertmanager.yml), specify the notification channels where alerts should be sent (email, Slack, etc.). This involves setting up a receiver for each channel.
Example notification options include:
Email: Send alerts to a specified email address.
Slack: Send alerts to a specific Slack channel.
PagerDuty: Send alerts to a PagerDuty service for incident management.
Alert Evaluation and Triggers:
Prometheus evaluates the defined alerting rules regularly (usually every 30 seconds).
If an alert condition is met, Prometheus sends the alert to Alertmanager.
Alertmanager then processes the alert according to its configuration and sends notifications to the configured channels.
Alert Severity and Labels:
Alerts can be categorized by severity (e.g., critical, warning) and labeled with custom metadata (e.g., service name, instance).
Alerts can be grouped and handled differently depending on these labels. For example, a high-priority alert may trigger an immediate notification, while a lower-priority one might be grouped with others.
Alert Silencing:
Alertmanager supports silencing, where certain alerts can be temporarily muted for a defined period (e.g., during maintenance).
Silencing helps avoid unnecessary notifications when you know there is a temporary issue that doesn't require immediate action.
Test Alerts:
Once configured, test the alerts to ensure that they trigger and notifications are sent to the appropriate channels.
By following these steps, you can set up a robust alerting system with Prometheus and Alertmanager, allowing your team to be notified of critical issues with your backend system.