The days of learning HTML, CSS, and JavaScript and walking into a 100K a year job are over. The market is flooded with experienced engineers. If you want a chance to land a job, you need to stand out, and here's how you can do that: by cultivating a professional brand. No, I don't mean a social media brand, even though that could certainly help. I mean a professional developer brand. For developers, your professional brand is shaped by the projects that you've worked on, your resume, and how you present yourself on platforms like LinkedIn. Together, these elements signal your skills and experience to potential employers.

Your goal is to cultivate a brand that reflects experience and expertise, even if you are just starting out. This doesn't mean just seeming experienced; it's about gaining valuable experience and then showcasing that effectively. Think of building your developer brand as a pyramid. At the top level is your LinkedIn profile. Below that is your resume. At the foundation is your portfolio. While all levels of this pyramid are crucial, your primary focus should be on developing a solid portfolio. This is where you will build authority in your work. Your portfolio is where you will establish your set of credentials, the thing that tells people you know what you're doing, that you know how to build real software, not just simple HTML and CSS landing pages. 

One of the key levers to influence is authority. This is what will make you attractive to employers. Despite being told your whole life not to judge a book by its cover, most humans are quick to judge by appearance. Because recruiters are your ticket to landing a tech job, if you don't quickly impress them with your resume and the work that you've done, you will not get any call back. So how do you build authority in your work? If you have previous work experience, that should suffice as your set of credentials, and from there, you would just need to work with a professional resume writer to help your previous experience stand out. But for those who don't have experience already, this is what you need to do: you need to build a set of thoroughly developed portfolio projects. I'm not just talking about simple HTML and CSS landing pages or tutorials that you've copied verbatim from Udemy. I'm talking about projects that you've spent time and effort crafting, projects that solve some real-world problem, projects that really set you apart from all the other junior developers out there.

When you build your own projects, without the crutch of a tutorial to lean on, you will struggle a ton at first. But it's in this struggle where you will learn the most as a new developer. If you extend that time frame of building thoroughly developed projects over the course of 6 months to a year, it's inevitable that you will gain experience and the know-how that employers are looking for. If you want a better idea of the projects that you can build, you can check out my video on portfolio creation within my free programming community at Software Developer Academy. Inside this community, you'll gain access to a free course called the Programming Protocol that will take you through how to land a job as a new programmer. You also gain access to active forums that over 5,000 aspiring software developers like you use to ask questions, get career advice, and help others.

A solid portfolio will make you stand out so much more than someone who has maybe a bachelor's degree and little demonstration that they know how to develop real-world software. Once you build this foundation, you'll be able to tend to the second level of the developer pyramid by building a high-quality resume packed with tons of data that showcases your skill. Here's an example of some fake portfolio projects, theoretically built over the course of a year, and how these projects could be showcased on an entry-level resume. Notice how each project is carefully detailed, giving the impression that each was a professional engagement or position that I held. I actually spent hundreds of dollars and hired a professional resume writer to make this resume, which is something that you could do if you wanted to, or you could download this resume for free. The link for that is in the description.

Once you create your resume from the projects that you've built, you should be able to transfer that resume data over to a LinkedIn profile. While your LinkedIn profile is the smallest layer in the developer brand pyramid, it will be your biggest funnel for getting eyeballs on you. It is so pivotal that you have a very professional presence on LinkedIn with a detailed bio, a professional headshot, and a display of competency. Another lever of influence is social proof. By boosting your connections, getting skill endorsements, and gathering reviews on your LinkedIn profile, you will prove to recruiters that you are respected and liked. 

If you're solely relying on the spray-and-pray method of finding a job, applying to that job through a posting, and hoping for a call back, you are massively handicapping yourself. With a finely-tuned profile enriched by social proof and LinkedIn opening you up to a pool of recruiters inside their recruiter algorithm, you're much more likely to receive a direct message from recruiters about job opportunities. Not only that, when you apply to a job, you can directly find the recruiter who posted the job and DM them personally. They won't respond every time, but just by going that extra step to reach out significantly increases your chances of getting a call back and getting interviews on the schedule. 

Since recruiters serve as your gateway to securing interviews, if there's one key takeaway from this video, it's this: step into the recruiter's shoes. Why would a recruiter want to reach out to you? Why would a recruiter want to respond to your job application? After all, their job, their livelihood, is solely based on finding the best possible candidate. Why should they assume that's you? People have this idea that, even though they don't have job experience, if they can somehow express to a recruiter that they're ready to work hard, maybe they'll get hired. Then they do this thing where they explicitly state on their LinkedIn profile or on their resume that they're an entry-level developer and that they're hoping to find their first job. While that might work for you in some cases, it won't work in most. It's kind of like DMing a girl and saying, "Hey, I've never had a girlfriend before, but I'm hoping that you'll be my first." It sort of comes off as desperate. While getting a job and finding a girlfriend are different, the human dynamic is the same. People don't want something that other people don't want. 

You must present yourself as confident on LinkedIn, on your resume, and when you're actually talking to recruiters or interviewing for a company. To be confident, you must have competence. If you follow this outline: one, spend time building high-quality portfolio projects, I'm talking 6 to 12 months; two, hire a professional resume writer to showcase the projects that you've built on your resume in an effective way; and three, build a high-quality LinkedIn profile from your resume, you will naturally gain confidence just by doing the work.